Spline interpolation is a significant tool in computer graphics, computer-aided geometric
design and engineering as well. Convexity is prevalent shape feature of data. Therefore,
the need for convexity preserving interpolating curves and surfaces according to the given
data becomes inevitable. The aspiration of this paper is to preserve the hereditary attribute
that is the convexity of data. There are many applications of convexity preserving of data,
for instance, in the design of telecommunication systems, nonlinear programming arising in
engineering, approximation of functions, optimal control, and parameter estimation.
The problem of convexity-preserving interpolation has been considered by a number
of authors 1–21 and references therein. Bao et al. 1 used function values and first
derivatives of function to introduce a rational cubic spline cubic/cubic. A method for
value control, inflection-point control and convexity control of the interpolation at a point
was developed to be used in practical curve design. Asaturyan et al. 3 constructed a sixdegree piecewise polynomial interpolant for the space curves to satisfy the shape-preserving
properties for collinear and coplanar data.
Brodlie and Butt 4 developed a piecewise rational cubic function to preserve the
shape of convex data. In 4, the authors inserted extra knots in the interval where the
interpolation loses the convexity of convex data which is the drawback of this scheme.
Carnicer et al. 5 analyzed the convexity-preserving properties of rational Bezier and non- ´
uniform rational B-spline curves from a geometric point of view and also characterize totally
positive systems of functions in terms of geometric convexity-preserving properties of the
rational curves.
Clements 6 developed a C2 parametric rational cubic interpolant with tension
parameter to preserve the convexity. Sufficient conditions were derived to preserve the
convexity of the function on strictly left/right winding polygonal line segments. Costantini
and Fontanella 8 preserved the convexity of data by semi-global method. The scheme has
some research gaps like the degree of rectangular patches in the interpolant that was too
large; the resulting surfaces were not visually pleasing and smooth.
Delbourgo and Gregory 9 developed an explicit representation of rational cubic
function with one free parameter which can be used to preserve the convexity of convex data.
Meng and Shi Long 11 also developed an explicit representation of rational cubic function
with two free parameters which can be used to preserve the convexity of convex data. In the
schemes 9, 11, there was no choice for user to refine the convexity curve as desired. The
rational spline was represented in terms of first derivative values at the knots and provided
an alternative to the spline under tension to preserve the shape of monotone and convex data
by Gregory 10.
McAllister 12, Passow 13, and Roulier 14 considered the problem of interpolating
monotonic and convex data in the sense of monotonicity and convexity preserving. They
used a piecewise polynomial Bernstein-Bezier function and introduce additional knots into ´
their schemes. Such a scheme for quadratic spline interpolation was described by McAllister
12 and was further developed by Schumaker 15 using piecewise quadratic polynomial
which was very economical, but the method generally inserts an extra knot in each interval
to interpolate.
Sarfraz and Hussain 17 used the rational cubic function with two shape parameters
to solve the problem of convexity preserving of convex data. Data-dependent sufficient
constraints were derived to preserve the shape of convex data. Sarfraz 18 developed a
piecewise rational cubic function with two families of parameters. In 18, the authors derived
the sufficient conditions on shape parameters to preserve the physical shape properties of
data. Sarfraz 19–21 used piecewise rational cubic interpolant in parametric context for
shape preserving of plane curves and scalar curves with planar data. The schemes 17–21
are local, but, unfortunately, they have no flexibility in the convexity-preserving curves.
In this paper, we construct a rational cubic function with three free parameters. One
of the free parameter is used as a constrained to preserve the convexity of convex data while
the other two are left free for the user to modify the convex curve. Sufficient data-dependent
constraints are derived. Our scheme has a number of attributes over the existing schemes.
i In this paper, the shape-preserving of convex data is achieved by simply imposing
the conditions subject to data on the shape parameters used in the description of